pkgs/README.md: classify and add rules to the naming convention (#340452)
NixOS/nixpkgs: pkgs/README.md

- [ ] patches have a comment describing either the upstream URL or a reason why the patch wasn't upstreamed
- [ ] patches that are remotely available are fetched rather than vendored

##### Possible improvements

##### Comments
```

## Automatic package updates
[automatic-package-updates]: #automatic-package-updates

Nixpkgs periodically tries to update all packages that have a `passthru.updateScript` attribute.

> [!Note]
> A common pattern is to use the [`nix-update-script`](../pkgs/common-updater/nix-update.nix) attribute provided in Nixpkgs, which runs [`nix-update`](https://github.com/Mic92/nix-update):
>
> ```nix
> { stdenv, nix-update-script }:
> stdenv.mkDerivation {
>   # ...
>   passthru.updateScript = nix-update-script { };
> }
> ```
>
> For simple packages, this is often enough, and will ensure that the package is updated automatically by [`nixpkgs-update`](https://ryantm.github.io/nixpkgs-update) when a new version is released.
> The [update bot](https://nix-community.org/update-bot) runs periodically to attempt to automatically update packages, and will run `passthru.updateScript` if set.

> > While not strictly necessary if the project is listed on [Repology](https://repology.org), using `nix-update-script` allows the package to update via many more sources (e.g. GitHub releases).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> While not strictly necessary, if the project is listed on [Repology](https://repology.org), using `nix-update-script` allows the package to update via many more sources (e.g. GitHub releases).
```

  Example:

  ```json
  [
    {
      "attrPath": "volume_key",
      "oldVersion": "0.3.11",
      "newVersion": "0.3.12",
      "files": [
        "/path/to/nixpkgs/pkgs/development/libraries/volume-key/default.nix"
      ]
    }
  ]
  ```
  :::

  When `update.nix` is run with `--argstr commit true`, it will create a separate commit for each of the objects.
  An empty list can be returned when the script did not update any files; for example, when the package is already at the latest version.

  The commit object contains the following values:

  - `attrPath` – a string containing the attribute path
  - `oldVersion` – a string containing the old version
  - `newVersion` – a string containing the new version
  - `files` – a non-empty list of file paths (as strings) to add to the commit
  - `commitBody` (optional) – a string with extra content to be appended to the default commit message (useful for adding changelog links)
  - `commitMessage` (optional) – a string to use instead of the default commit message

  If the returned list contains exactly one object (e.g. `[{}]`), all values are optional and will be determined automatically.

## Deprecating/removing packages

> There is currently no policy when to remove a package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is currently no policy on when to remove a package.
```

    };
  }
  ```

> [!Note]
> When fetching from GitHub, always reference revisions by their full commit hash.
> GitHub shares commit hashes among all forks and returns `404 Not Found` when a short commit hash is ambiguous.
> It already happened in Nixpkgs for short, 6-character commit hashes.
>
> Pushing large amounts of auto generated commits into forks is a practical vector for a denial-of-service attack, and was already [demonstrated against GitHub Actions Beta](https://blog.teddykatz.com/2019/11/12/github-actions-dos.html).

## Patches

Sometimes, changes are needed to the source to allow building a derivation in nixpkgs, or to get earlier access to an upstream fix or improvement.
When using the `patches` parameter to `mkDerivation`, make sure the patch name clearly describes the reason for the patch, or add a comment.

Patches already merged upstream or published elsewhere should be retrieved using `fetchpatch`.

```nix
{
  patches = [
    (fetchpatch {
      name = "fix-check-for-using-shared-freetype-lib.patch";
      url = "http://git.ghostscript.com/?p=ghostpdl.git;a=patch;h=8f5d285";
      hash = "sha256-uRcxaCjd+WAuGrXOmGfFeu79cUILwkRdBu48mwcBE7g=";
    })
  ];
}
```

> Otherwise, you can add a `.patch` file to the `nixpkgs` repository.
> In the interest of keeping our maintenance burden and the size of nixpkgs to a minimum, only do this for patches that are unique to `nixpkgs` or that have been proposed upstream but are not merged yet, cannot be easily fetched or have a high chance to disappear in the future due to unstable or unreliable URLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, you can add a `.patch` file to the Nixpkgs repository.
In the interest of keeping our maintenance burden and the size of Nixpkgs to a minimum, only do this for patches that are unique to Nixpkgs or that have been proposed upstream but are not merged yet, cannot be easily fetched or have a high chance to disappear in the future due to unstable or unreliable URLs.
```

# Conventions

The key words _must_, _must not_, _required_, _shall_, _shall not_, _should_, _should not_, _recommended_, _may_, and _optional_ in this section are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119). Only _emphasized_ words are to be interpreted in this way.

## Package naming

In Nixpkgs, there are generally three different names associated with a package:

- The `pname` attribute of the derivation. This is what most users see, in particular when using `nix-env`.

> - The variable name used for the instantiated package in [by-name structure](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/by-name/README.md) or `all-packages.nix`, and when passing it as a dependency to other functions. Typically this is called the _package attribute name_. This is what Nix expression authors see. It can also be used when installing using `nix-env -iA`.

Author: > This is what Nix expression authors see.

What is "Nix expression authors"?

> - The variable name used for the instantiated package in [by-name structure](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/by-name/README.md) or `all-packages.nix`, and when passing it as a dependency to other functions. Typically this is called the _package attribute name_. This is what Nix expression authors see. It can also be used when installing using `nix-env -iA`.

Reviewer 2: It doesn't actually matter. I was just being conservative with the existing text.

```suggestion
- The attribute name used for the package in the [`pkgs/by-name` structure](./pkgs/by-name/README.md) or in [`all-packages.nix`](./pkgs/top-level/all-packages.nix), and when passing it as a dependency in recipes.
```

- The filename for (the directory containing) the Nix expression.

Most of the time, these are the same. For instance, the package `e2fsprogs` has a `pname` attribute `"e2fsprogs"`, is bound to the variable name `e2fsprogs` in `all-packages.nix`, and the Nix expression is in `pkgs/os-specific/linux/e2fsprogs/default.nix`.

> These are a few naming guidelines:

Author: This is (and was) already in `## Package naming` subtitle

> These are a few naming guidelines:

Reviewer 2: Yes, right. We need a sign that now come the actual guidelines, and the current sentence is clumsy. How about

```suggestion
Follow these guidelines:
```

- For `pname` attribute:

  - It _should_ be identical to the upstream package name.

  - It _must not_ contain uppercase letters — e.g., `"mplayer"` instead of `"MPlayer"`.

- For variable name of the package:

  - It _must_ be a valid variable name in Nix.

  - If the `pname` starts with a digit, the variable name _should_ be prefixed with an underscore — e.g., the corresponding variable name for `0ad` should be `_0ad`. Otherwise the variable name _should not_ be prefixed with an underline.

>   - Dashes in the package `pname` _should_ be preserved in new variable names, rather than converted to underscores or camel cased — e.g., `http-parser` instead of `http_parser` or `httpParser`.

Author: Does this infer that hyphenate is more preferable than snake/camel case? Should we convert snake/camel case to hyphenate?

>   - Dashes in the package `pname` _should_ be preserved in new variable names, rather than converted to underscores or camel cased — e.g., `http-parser` instead of `http_parser` or `httpParser`.

Reviewer 2: > Does this infer that hyphenate is more preferable than snake/camel case?

I read this as that we should keep whatever is in `pname`, but we could be more concrete about this.

```suggestion
  - New attribute names _should_ be the same as the value in `pname`.

     Do not convert hyphenated names to to [snake case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) or [camel case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camel_case).
      This was done historically, but is not necessary any more.
      [The Nix language allows dashes in identifiers since 2012](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/commit/95c74eae269b2b9e4bc514581b5caa1d80b54acc).
     
     Example: Use `http-parser` instead of `http_parser` or `httpParser`.
```

  - If there are multiple versions of a package, this _should_ be reflected in the variable names in `all-packages.nix`, e.g. `json-c_0_9` and `json-c_0_11`. If there is an obvious “default” version, make an attribute like `json-c = json-c_0_9;`. See also [versioning][versioning].

## Versioning
[versioning]: #versioning

These are the guidelines for `version` attribute of the package:

> - It _must_ start with a digit e.g., `"0.3.1rc2"` or `"0-unstable-1970-01-01"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It _must_ start with a digit e.g., `"0.3.1rc2"` or `"0-unstable-1970-01-01"`.

  This is required for backwards-compatibility with [how `nix-env` parses derivation names](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/latest/command-ref/nix-env#selectors).
```

  - It _must_ start with a digit e.g., `"0.3.1rc2"` or `"0-unstable-1970-01-01"`.

- If a project has no suitable preceding releases - e.g., no versions at all, or an incompatible versioning / tagging schema - then the latest upstream version in the above schema should be `0`.
  - If a package is a commit from a repository without a version assigned, then the `version` attribute _should_ be the latest upstream version preceding that commit, followed by `-unstable-` and the date of the (fetched) commit. The date _must_ be in `"YYYY-MM-DD"` format.

Example: Given a project that has no tags / released versions at all, or applies versionless tags like `latest` or `YYYY-MM-DD-Build`, a commit authored on March 15, 2022 would have `version = "0-unstable-2022-03-15"`.
    Example: Given a project had its latest releases `2.2` in November 2021, and `3.0` in January 2022, a commit authored on March 15, 2022 for an upcoming bugfix release `2.2.1` would have `version = "2.2-unstable-2022-03-15"`.

> - Dashes in the package `pname` _should_ be preserved in new variable names, rather than converted to underscores or camel cased — e.g., `http-parser` instead of `http_parser` or `httpParser`. The hyphenated style is preferred in all three package names.

Author: Here I removed "The hyphenated style is preferred in all three package names." because it isn't actually helpful as contributors are expected to follow upstream name -> pname -> attribute name.

- The `pname` attribute of the derivation. This is what most users see, in particular when using `nix-env`.

- The variable name used for the instantiated package in [by-name structure](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/by-name/README.md) or `all-packages.nix`, and when passing it as a dependency to other functions. Typically this is called the _package attribute name_. This is what Nix expression authors see. It can also be used when installing using `nix-env -iA`.

- The filename for (the directory containing) the Nix expression.

Most of the time, these are the same. For instance, the package `e2fsprogs` has a `pname` attribute `"e2fsprogs"`, is bound to the variable name `e2fsprogs` in `all-packages.nix`, and the Nix expression is in `pkgs/os-specific/linux/e2fsprogs/default.nix`.

These are a few naming guidelines:

- For `pname` attribute:

  - It _should_ be identical to the upstream package name.

  - It _must not_ contain uppercase letters — e.g., `"mplayer"` instead of `"MPlayer"`.

- For variable name of the package:

  - It _must_ be a valid variable name in Nix.

>   - If the `pname` starts with a digit, the variable name _should_ be prefixed with an underline — e.g., the corresponding variable name for `0ad` should be `_0ad`. Otherwise the variable name _should not_ be prefixed with an underline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - If the `pname` starts with a digit, the variable name _should_ be prefixed with an underscore — e.g., the corresponding variable name for `0ad` should be `_0ad`. Otherwise the variable name _should not_ be prefixed with an underline.
```
